My name is Rebecca, and it's my very great pleasure to host this evening.
Shortly, we'll start with a few minutes of silence, and then I'll say a few words of introduction to Alistair, for those of you who may not have met him before.
We're starting on time this evening, and we're going to finish on time too, as Alistair will be driving home to Glasgow after the event.
Alistair spent the day working with the Gen Retreat participants and has generously agreed to come and offer this time with the wider community.
And in waving his fee for this event is ensuring that as much as money as possible goes towards the sanctuary rebuilding.
Thank you for this, Alistair.
Now, if you'd like to get comfortable, I'll just say a few words to lead us into the silence.
Let's spend a few moments gathering ourselves in the silence of our hearts and minds.
Let's welcome our connection with the over-lighting essence of this place, which continues to inspire us in new directions.
Let's be aware of our connection to this land, to the ancestors, to each other.
Draw closer into the silence.
Thank you.
I'd like to introduce you to Alistair Macintosh.
He is an academic, a teacher, an inspirational speaker and storyteller.
He's written many books and papers, some of which are available here to purchase if you're quick off the mark at the end of the session this evening.
As a Quaker, he comes from a long tradition of spiritual activism.
I encourage you to look at his website, which is a treasure trove of ideas and offerings exploring many of the urgent issues of our times.
Perhaps more importantly for us tonight, Alistair is a great friend of the Findhorn community.
He's often spoken at conferences here.
He is a Findhorn fellow.
He did a Findhorn TEDx talk, which is well worth finding.
And he's run week-long programmes, the last one being on spiritual activism.
I asked him about his first visit here.
When did he first connect with the community?
And he told me that it was when he was aged 20 in 1976, when he brought a group of fellow students from Aberdeen University to investigate the claims of giant cabbages.
What touched him most in that visit, though, wasn't cabbages, but the building work that was being done on the foundations of this building.
The whole community took part in the creation of this building. Everybody was involved.
And if they were elderly, perhaps, and they weren't able to carry bricks and planks, then they baked cakes for the tea bloke.
Alistair wrote of that time, we were all embarking on a deep awakening.
He is a fellow traveller on that path of deep awakening.
Welcome, Alistair, and thank you.
Thank you so much, Rebecca and Roy, also for hosting me last night.
I drove up here last night, I've got a very tight schedule just now, and I've arrived just in time for dinner.
I should say I'm, oh hello, Chris. Chris, long ago was one of the students of my wife and I. Nice to see you.
And also, I was delighted to hear that another former student, Sam Graham, has been engaged with John Talbot and some wonderful work here.
I don't know if he's listening on the Zoom, but if you are, hello, Sam, and I've been hearing great things.
I was just going to say, Chris, I'm making a false start, and this is going to explain what I'm going to be doing tonight and then make a proper start, so to speak.
And what I just need to explain is the reason I've got my phone on my knee here is that I've gone pretty profoundly deaf,
and so I use complex little microphones, got one plugged in up there that feed into my hearing aids by Bluetooth who's here, another emergency one here,
but I control the sound on my own app, so it's not that I'm doing my emails.
Over end would suggest otherwise, perhaps, but just I'm dealing with that.
When we're doing this discussion, if I don't pick you up right, if I pick you up wrongly, then please, it's not you, it's just a hardware problem and me rather than a software problem in you.
What I'm going to be doing tonight is quite difficult, and I just want to give a bit of a preamble, because I'm here, thanks to, let me just get a surname correctly, thanks to Anna Corfassner.
Anna Corfassner, who I've just spent a day together with Madge Bray.
You want to just give a wave, Madge, so they can see you. Madge, there's a local tradition there from these parts, somebody you should really know about, who has deeply enriched the day in which we were looking at
the indigenous, the group of just over 20 young people over there in Cologne.
So I've been quite pressured in putting this talk together, because I had that to prepare as well as Karen and I going off to our home area in France on Thursdays,
so I'd love to do with that, and for that reason, I've been more formally structured in what I'm going to be doing tonight.
I'm going to be using notes, which I don't usually do, but give me a bit less spontaneous.
It's also quite a library with me, because I may be referring to that in quoting various passages, I'm just giving you a little bit of context.
The biggest thing is that when Anna first invited me, somebody, and I can't find my record so it was contacted me, asking if I would do a talk like this, saying that the Finthhorn community was going through a lot of transition,
and given my background, could I come and talk about land reform and appropriate community buyout structures.
Now, I don't know who that person is, but if they are here, my apologies to you, and please understand, the reason I said no was that it's actually none of my business to poke my nose into your business as to what kind of structures and so on you might be looking at.
And I said to Rebecca, I want to be quite careful this evening to try and avoid that ground and in discussion, but I ask you not to lead me into ground that is kind of internal.
Because instead, what I'm going to be doing is that on the 17th of August, I think it was, Roger and Terry, your CEO, organised a Zoom seminar for Finthhorn fellows who were at least 50 of us on it, as to what the changes were.
And I am taking the setting of that Zoom meeting that we had as being the appropriate framework in which for me to speak tonight, not in terms of trying to tell you what we should be doing, but rather to reflect on where we are in these times,
on why it is that what you are going through is far from unique in these times. How that speaks to the condition of these times, as Carl Jung puts it, when the spirit of the death breaks through and interrupts the spirit of the age.
And what callings, what meanings, what promptings, is my point of stories. I'm going to speak for about an hour in total, I want about three and a half hour at the end of the discussion.
The effect of people keeping an eye on time, when we're about three quarters away soon, when we've got about three quarters on our left, give me a re-nudge so I know I've got 15 minutes to wind up, so as to make sure we honour space.
So that's me just setting the parameters. And now, if perhaps I can make a proper start and share with me for a few moments of quicker style stillness.
I've heard from the first verse of the first chapter of the Hindu sacred text, the Bhagavad Gita, which I often use to set the framework to remind us of the framework in which we hold our grounded presence.
Dharma kashetra, on the field of Dharma.
Kua kashetra, on the battlefield of the tribal group known as Rukus.
Sanjaya, the name of the eagle-eyed Sharia pier, of the blind king through to restra.
Wan muskaru, in his wonderful Penguin Classics translation, not the most scholarly translation, but certainly as Ravindra Naskagor recognised.
Muskaru's translations of the Gita and the Pranishads are the most poetic and get most to the spiritual essence of it.
Translate that first line as, on the field of truth, on the field of Dharma, on the battlefield of life, what came to pass Sanjaya.
There we have nested three levels of reality to take them in reverse order.
Of what came to pass, what happens in the now, on the battlefield of life, in that wider framework of looking at our lives as a whole, consisting of a flow of these present moments of the now.
Dharma kashetra, on the field of truth, on the field of Dharma, held in what I would call the God's Peace, the divine holding of the whole shebang, the present moment of us sitting here tonight, held in the context of our wider lives, held in a universal context that's a pathos understanding of anyone.
When looking at the future of a community, I would suggest holding it at those three levels.
At what it is in practical terms we need to do right now, and to keep the show together, on how that interacts with how we use our lives in service.
And deepest of all, highest of all, what the divine calling of it all is.
As Rebecca said, I came here, first of all, on 2 May 1976, when a retired London banker called John Hilton showed us round.
He said, well, we're trying to live down the giant cabbages and strawberries.
We're trying to concentrate on the spirituality that we are trying to constantly hear, and that this place concentrates.
And he took us to a building site. It has all sand and building materials, and one hippie sort of people with long golden hair and rippling muscles carrying stuff around.
And John said, here we are building the universal ball, and people will come from all over the world.
Whenever I speak here, I bring with me just as a kind of person.
Hallez man, the book I bought in the Phoenix shop, or have it now is these days, altered states of consciousness edited by Charles T. Tartt, a seminal work to which I still refer in my work.
And the key word there is consciousness, because this is a new age community.
I sit within the Quaker tradition, the new age maybe overlaps with that, it's not entirely the same.
But what is it that we're talking about when we talk about the new age?
I was intrigued, delighted the other day in that Zoom seminar, to see William Bloom there.
I don't think I've ever met him in person.
But perhaps the most significant book about the new age movement, that's its title, in the UK is by the academic Paul Healus from the Lancaster University Religious Studies Unit.
And I'd just like to read you what he says here, because he's got an appendix here, characterisations of the new age, saying William Bloom's excellent 1992 formulation runs as follows.
And I'm not going to read you through the two pages of bullet points, but I'm going to read you one of them.
During this period of time, the evolution of the planet and of humanity has reached a point when we are undergoing a fundamental spiritual change in our individual mass consciousness.
This is why we talk of a new age.
This new consciousness is a result of the increasingly successful incarnation of what some people call the energies of cosmic love.
This new consciousness demonstrates itself in an instinctive understanding of the secretness, and in particular the interconnectedness of all existence.
This is why we talk of a new age.
So, my first time of hearing of Findhorn was actually from our church of Scotland minister, that's the paterian minister, Ardyn Collin McLean, when I was growing up in the Isle of Lewis.
And I can remember conversations in the man's after the Sunday sermon, my father, a doctor in the Isle of Lewis, we had a close social relationship between the two families.
And they would talk about all manner of things, including what was happening at this place called Findhorn.
And that's why I was moved on 2 May 1974 to bring that through from Aberdeen University here, so that we might investigate.
Only to be told it wasn't about giant cabbages so much as about spirituality.
So what's happened since then?
Since then, over the past 20 years, and this came out strongly in the Fellows Zoom things, I would say that there have been six main changes that have made life more difficult for you now than it was then.
First of all, there is a sense of mission completed.
You've got Findhorn spin-offs all over the world.
You look at any academic paper about the so-called New Age, and Findhorn will almost certainly feature prominently in it.
The elders in a sense have done that task that they set out to do in the late 60s, early 70s in that respect.
But furthermore, the internet means you no longer have to be here.
Hello all of you on Zoom. None of you had to fly into Inverness to hear me tonight, did you?
But you know what I mean.
Folks don't have to come in physical presence to a place to have the same experience as they did before.
Thirdly, in as much as people are conscious, they will be socially and environmentally conscious,
and thereby aware of the carbon karma of travel.
So you have to think, I would say, not a question of not travelling, but think twice about travelling.
So that will be an added factor. You've got Brexit affecting people's visas.
You've had the massive knock of COVID, and on top of that you had the fire.
On top of that you had the fire.
Some years ago, when, you must forgive me folks, I'm very badly behaved,
I should be referring to Judas as my focaliser when I come here, but out of necessity I always caught my mind.
And I was running, of course, in spiritual activism, the spiritual basis of activism.
And I happened to be sharing a bungalow with a wonderful man, a former director of education here,
Michael Lindfield, who is one of the Ffintan Fellows.
And I wrote to him on the 11th of August prior to the Fellows' Meeting.
I wrote to him reflecting on where things are at now, because it doesn't just affect you, it affects Schumacher College,
it affects the Iona community with which I'm closely associated, it affects all of these kinds of things.
And we have an email discussion of what is going on. I'd like to read you from his email with his permission.
Yes, our God is an all-consuming fire.
In the lineage here at Meditation Mount, the Roberto Assaggi, only inspired.
Marilyn, of course, had he worked closely with Assaggi only.
I was delighted to hear that it was apparently so deaf, he didn't even try to use gismos like this,
it probably didn't exist then, but he had his questions written down and so on, and yet he's still managed.
In our lineage here at Meditation Mount, transformation is described as a shifting consciousness from one state to a new level of beingness through the agency of fire, the italicisers.
I believe that the original forms of communal living created at Ffintan have to be recycled and out of this natural state of temporary chaos,
a new order will be called into being by the note of fiery purpose, as is intentionally sounded.
This compelling call of purpose, this compelling call of purpose, not generational, not strategic plan thinking that,
but heeding a call, a vocation is vocal, it is a call of purpose, is a magnetic appeal that attracts random elements like iron filings and brings them into a new pattern of relationship with others.
Ffintan has gone through the outer fire and now needs to go through the inner fire for deep transformation to take place.
Hence my title this evening, discernment and all-consuming fire, to discern from the Latin die to cut through a diagonal that cuts through and sinair to separate, to cut through and to separate, to separate what is of true spiritual calling from that which is of other forms of calling.
And so Terry Gilby, your CEO, said to the fellows, I want to start with collective consultation.
How does the foundation serve the world today and into the future? And may that be different from how we have done it and are doing it?
And just in reading those words, I realise how potentially explosive that is. I want to start with collective consultation. I've been involved in managing decline in organisations and let me tell you it's a horrible experience.
It's a horrible experience because everybody who's not simply a part of it feels left out in some way and you're there trying to hold it all and balance it all. It's very difficult stuff. It needs skilled holding.
Offs those who are management, managing change, but it also requires holding in a way that keeps on calling those who have got positions of responsibility or trustees or whatever it might be, calling them back to that God-given, higher purpose.
Dharma cieshetwyr in the field of Dharma. What is the field of design calling? That's what the Dharma is, that we are held in.
And so Terry continued, or rather the fellows chat. I take your part in the fellows chat, said the foundation was originally set up to support the impulse manifesting through the community.
Now is a time to let go of the organisational ego, the outward face and listen to the angel of fintone. In the Bible it talks about the angels of the nations.
My late friend, the American theologian Walter Wink talks about the principalities and the powers and the angels being an expression for the interiority, the spiritual inner constellation of things.
By which the Dharma comes through, or in his Christian context, the way, the life and the truths that his Christ comes through in organisational experts.
And that is why Jung said, one does not become enlightened by imagining figures of light, but by making the darkness conscious.
One does not become enlightened by imagining figures of light, but by making the darkness conscious.
My source of which is the CG Jung Foundation's Twitter account on 8 September.
Now Jung said, and again this was something, you know the wonderful serendipitys, just day before yesterday a Jungian on Twitter put out this sharing.
From visions notes of a seminar given 1930 to 1934 volume one.
Jung said this, when you, because I mean let's be clear folks, you folks are in a very disagreeable situation just now.
Yes, you know, everybody talks optimistically about well the fire cleanser, the phoenix will rise and all the rest of it and yet you know how difficult that is.
But this is what Jung said about such situations. He said, when you get into a disagreeable situation, where you see no opening, no direct path, you assume that you are quite alone with yourself.
You know the military, I give lectures to the military on non-violence and they speak of the loneliness of high command.
The loneliness of when you are carrying things and you can perhaps see things that you can't always share with others, the reasons of confidentiality of whatever people's employment contracts or whatever it might be.
You are in a lonely position. You assume that you are quite alone with yourself in a way to the very good thing that you think so, otherwise you would never make up your mind.
You would remain merely a child. We have to accept that lonely work, that lonely pilgrimage every next step and this is not just those in appointed positions of responsibility.
This applies to every one of us for the reasons that I'm going to be coming to in terms of how to organise a community in a spiritually held place and how every one of us, no matter how insignificant we might feel we are, has a place in holding.
Let's see what else Jung says. He says, you must believe that you are practically alone. At which point I refer to Henri Corbyn's book Alone with the Alone, a very deep study of the Sufism of Ibn Arabi and what Corbyn is saying, I brought these along just to fold them up because I like the physicality of holding a book.
A book is a sacred object in the sense that my ones have written all over and dogged them. What have you done?
Corbyn says, Corbyn, citing Ibn Arabi from the Islamic tradition, speaks about the loneliness of God, speaks about how God prays for the world.
Let's just confine ourselves to this world and let's just confine ourselves to the human world for now rather than widening it out beyond our immediate relics.
God in God alone prays for the world and when we pray with God then we become companions with the divine.
What Dame Julian of Norwich spoke of as a revelation of divine love, such as how divine love happens when we in whether you call it meditation or contemplation or prayer, when we hold or ask to be held in that divine hand,
when we ask for our concerns to be held in that divine hand, when we ask to be held in God's presence and to pray with God for God's work or God's or Allah or Brahman or Dao or Buddha nature.
I don't mind what you call it, forgive me, I'm coming out of my tradition. I'm coming out of my tradition when I'm back on holiday on the Isle of Lewis.
I make a point of going to the local Presbyterian Free Church of Scotland. You'll have heard all about them, Kate Forbes and all of that.
Yes, that is of the church of the community that I was raised in along with the Church of Scotland. I go to their sermons unless they can be very long and sometimes quite hellfire.
But you know what I love about them? I love the long, extemporary prayers because in those prayers, the Minister of the Elders hold the whole community, they summon the whole community, they name people in the community who are struggling with life or have celebrating something in life
and they bring it all before God and ask God to hold this in God's holy hand so that the community is carried.
I see you have Mary Campbell, my friend Mary Campbell coming and playing here. You may not know that her grandfather, her father and mother Archie and Marjorie were Edinburgh or our Edinburgh Quakers.
Her grandfather was Duncan Campbell, an evangelist in the Isle of Lewis in the 1950s, and Duncan Campbell, Mary's grandfather, defined revival as being a community saturated in God.
And what I'm really saying to you, what I'm trying to suggest to Nightford, is that if you're going to get out of this hole and if the phoenix is going to rise, ask yourself, are you open to that being saturated in God?
And if so, how might you express it? There's more on you, I'll leave it there, but I'd just like to mention Winifred Rushford because I stayed at, I had a long association with her daughter Diana Niels, a pregnant called Farm.
And Winifred was a pioneer of New Age in Scotland, particularly through therapeutic work at the Davidson Clinic. She was a psychotherapist. She had been a missionary doctor in India.
And her book, Something is Happening, subtitled Spiritual Awareness and Depth Psychology in the New Age, 1972, there she died at the age of 78. Laurence van der Post through the friend of hers and who stood in for Prince Charles at her funeral, asked her what was the secret of her energy.
She said, I never go against my unconscious. And she met Jung, she tells in that book, page 13, she met Jung when she was at Oxford in 1939, just before the Second World War.
She was speaking to a group of psychiatrists, and Jung said to the psychiatrist, this is your insanity. This is your insanity that you have lost your religion, that you have lost your connection with the divine.
You see what I'm calling to, you see why Michael Linfield resonates with T.S. Eliot in Little Giddings. The only hope or else despair lies in the choice of power to power to be redeemed from fire by fire.
What does that entail? It entails sitting in that oral consuming fire. In the Orthodox Christian tradition, the fire of hell is only the fire of love that can only burn off that which is not authentic to us.
Authentic, deeply author coming from the deep self, the way the truth in the life.
So our game needs to be to allow that fire of hell that screws up our plans in life in so many ways.
Come to understand it, the fire of divine love that can't burn out, burn off anything true to us. And that's just why Yates in the Celtic twilight talks about, let me read you the poem right at the end. How's my time? What time are we?
And we'll finish at...excellent, excellent. I've got another 20 minutes of venting. Wonder if, don't tell my wife that, she'll tell me, oh you should stop sooner.
Oh, yes. I've always taken a neighbor. Well, you know the banter we have. You know how we carry on it. I have two minds of life. One is in Finthbone here and the other is back in Glasgow. It's for rent.
Enter the twilight. Outworn heart in the outworn time. Come clear the nets of the wrong and the right. Come heart where hill is heaped upon hill, for there the mystical brotherhood of hollow wood and hilly wood and the changing moon work out their will and God stands winding his lonely horn.
The time and the world are ever in flight and God stands winding his human, his lonely horn. Again, that alone was the alone that the hands and feet of the divine in this world, our hands and feet. And can we put our weight behind that?
Because if we do at the Doughty Ching, chapter 16, then the myriad creatures all rise together and I watch their return. Returning to one's roots is known as stillness. This is what is meant by returning to one's destiny.
Some years ago, when I was here, Michael Lindfield gave a lecture. It had a mixed reception. He was talking quite a bit about Christianity. He didn't go down well with everybody, just as me talking about it might not go down well with everybody.
But his passion that night that stayed with me was to call the foundation here, or call the community, let me say here, back to its original, God inspired roots. Rebecca, have you got that term?
Can you remember, off-heart, what you rescued from the fire? If I move my microphone, or you've got your own microphone, could you just read it because you rescued this from the fire? Can you make that out? If I hold the mic for you so you can give me the mic?
Oh, there we go. Thank you.
When we were clearly enough after the sanctuary fire, we were taking bits and pieces individually in a kind of ritualistic fashion towards the skip that was clearly wide dance.
And I was passed a pile of ashes with some pieces of gold paper, gold leaf from something, and some burnt, singed pages of I mean's guidance, which is what you wanted me to read here.
The dawn is at hand into new and uncharted waters, griffith and proofing, rough and smooth. Listen and hear my voice, a new heaven and a new earth.
Can I just read that out? Again, the part one glimpses of Eileen Cadw's life, part two, the inner voice. The dawn is at hand into new and uncharted waters, through thick and thin, through rough and smooth. Listen and hear my voice.
On, literally, you can witness it, charred paper. It is charred paper. It is charred paper. There you are. That's what's come out of the ashes. That's what speaks.
Terry Gilby, again, the other night. I don't know Terry. I only know what I saw of him on the other night. I don't know if he's here tonight or not, but he brought back to him on this to put him again. How does this foundation serve the world today and into the future? How does this foundation, how does this community,
serve the world today and into the future? Because if you can identify what you can serve, what you are called to serve, then the way the truth and the life will open to you.
And that's the deeper level of the ddama created, the field of the ddama, on which the battlefield of life and what came to pass, Sanjaya, takes place. Who was Sanjaya? Sanjaya was the equal-eyed charioteer of the blind king's leadership, because political power or bureaucratic power is always blind.
Those who have to administer a place like this have to focus their energies on balancing the books and the marketing and getting people in and all the rest of it. They may not have the same opportunity to connect in so much with that deeper spiritual order.
But it's so important to understand in the organisation and ecology how that balance is.
There were various calls for more democracy, more participation in this fellows' Zoom, and people expressing frustration at not just in Fenton, but elsewhere, Orwell, etc., struggling to find ways forward by which that was possible.
The age-old question of how do you balance the need for certain types of professional knowledge and responsibility with everybody feeling a part of what is going on, even if they don't agree with it, recognising that it is due process that is taking place.
In that respect, I brought with me a book. I always keep a spare copy of this, and my spare copy that I'd given away the last one arrived just before coming here, and it came into me to bring this here and to leave this with you.
A book called Beyond Majority Rule brought us decisions in the religious society of friends in the Quakers. This is about Quaker discernment process, where when it is properly held at a gathered meeting, a meeting gathered in nothing less than the Holy Spirit,
what is discussed and the decisions made is not about the me, it's not even about the we as different groups in a collective, but it is about discerning the movement of the spirit in that.
We discussed it last night, and folk were saying it works better with small groups and large ones, and yet when the Quakers had to decide over whether to acknowledge gay marriage, 600 people with many different views, some strongly against, gathered together and found unity around accepting it.
Even though some disagreed, they felt that the sense of the meeting, not that expression, the sense of the meeting was in that direction, and they respected that people thought it.
So there you are, Rebecca. I'm going to give you this for it to be used in whatever way might serve the foundation if it does. I've also got some pages again that I can send to you that you might want to circulate so that people know the kind of material that's in that book.
I want to move on now with another 10 minutes. I want to take this a bit deeper. I want to take this process of what disarmament is a bit deeper, but it's an uncomfortable place.
Although I'm very much on the periphery of your community, just coming here for the guest occasion, and I would be wary of having myself described as new age, especially in some of the kind of circles that I move in.
Although in that original sense, William Bloom describes a keyless quote, very much a part of that. Although all of that.
When Rebecca asked Anna if I might be freed for this evening to give us sharing, I was quite apprehensive about it, not just because of the sensitivities, but also wondering whether I could really say what perhaps needed to be said.
And for the two nights before coming here, I thought, okay, you know, there's the angel of Finthorn, or to put it in my own language, the inner constellation of spiritual forces that hold us together.
Let me ask the angel of Finthorn to send me a dream for what I need to share with you. And two nights ago, three nights ago now, no dream.
And then the night before last, I was preparing to hit up here. I wake up at 4.30 in the morning and I said, my goodness, I need to get some thoughts down about this before I go.
And I worked at my computer, drafting stuff, checking references and books until 7 when I started to get really tired again.
I thought, I'll just go back and have an hour. And I woke up at half nine, two and a half hours.
And then I realized I'd been having a dream. And the dream was this. It's not a comfortable dream. It was very interesting.
I was coming back on the ferry from the island of Lewis with a group of six people, some of them indigenous to the island, others to the tourism.
And we're having a merry old time. And the ship was going to make an unscheduled early stop at which we were going to get off.
And knowing that, Rebecca and Roy always rescue me from Finthorn veganism when I come here by making a fish...
I probably shouldn't have compressed to the fish pie, but if they looked at my phone, they'd see the scales of Mackle.
I have to confess what I am and where I'm from and how I am and so on.
So fish pie was in my mind. And in the dream, I ordered the fish and chips for everybody before we got off the boat.
So we're all getting off the boat without fish suppers to get into the minibus of dinner.
And I noticed a device left on our table. I said, oh, that must be one of our people.
So I'm heading off and I'm about to go down the gang flank, but suddenly thought comes, maybe it's not one of theirs.
Maybe it belongs to one of the crew. So I go back and there's a steward, an island guy, a guy I know.
I said to him, this isn't yours by any chance. He said, oh yes, that's mine.
I said, what is it? And he switched it on and messages started flowing down.
He said, that's how I communicate with the captain.
So this is about communicating with that sense of higher power.
The dream then cut to the show and there was my former student Ian McKinnon,
a tradition bearer from the Isle of Skye, who's we've been referring to today.
And he was tending a flower bed, a raised flower bed,
or the probonad.
And he was planting it out beautifully with all kinds of flowers and shrubs that were indigenous to the place.
And he completed his work and walked off down to the seashore.
But then somebody came along with a kind of agitated energy
who was obviously a stranger to the place and started pulling out the shrubs and plants,
intending to replant them with stuff that did not belong in the place, that was not indigenous to the place.
And I said, hey, stop. Ian's planted it like Ian has planted it like that for a reason.
And the man wandered off and I replanted Ian's flowers.
This is about becoming indigenous to place.
The way I have always seen Findhorn, notwithstanding what I confess,
many of us in Scotland sometimes speak of as its wackiness,
notwithstanding the wacky elements of Findhorn, the way I have always seen it,
is it coming from California, from Germany, from Australia, from wherever it is you're coming from.
Many of you are of the diaspora that left this country in the time of the enclosures in England
or the clearances in Scotland, and you're coming back bearing gifts.
Hence the importance of, say, the work you've done in eco-architecture, in energy and so on.
No, it was wonderful to see Findhorn featured on the front cover of one of the IPCC's most recent scientific books.
That's a real accolade of what you've achieved there.
And yet I would suggest that there is a need now for the new age, whatever you want to call it,
to be grounded in place, to re-indigenise, to be.
Indigenous does not necessarily mean to be native, but it means to come to belong to a place.
Finally, we went down to the shore, where to cut the story short.
A stranger came and took my fishing line from me, cast it out, and pulled in two big black fish,
which I knew we had to eat, and yet I felt queasy about it.
It's a recurrent tree in my house, I call it my jellyfish.
It represents both my shadow in the Jungian sense, and the shadow of situations that I am in these days.
That part of the dream said, we have to process our shadow.
We have to catch our shadow, we have to consume our shadow, we have to integrate it in.
So you had the sense on the boat of being in touch.
I would suggest that there is divine energy.
You had the sense of re-indigenisation with Ian's planting out,
but also being aware that not everybody understands that process and its importance,
and you had the sense of integrating the shadow.
Finally, Jung's favourite story was a rainmaker.
I'm sure many of you who look here know it.
I use it frequently.
It was told to him by the German translator and missionary Richard Bielholm,
who was a missionary in China in the 1920s, or before that, before the First World War,
and into the start of the First World War.
While he was there, there was a terrible drought in the process.
The plants started to die, the animals started to die, the people knew that they would be next.
In their desperation, they went to the Protestant missionaries and asked for prayers.
The Protestant missionaries came and made their prayers and interminably long sermons.
Then they went to the Catholics, and the Catholics came and sprinkled holy water
and possessed round with statues of the Blessed Virgin Mary and whatever they would be doing.
I'm still no rain.
Then they went to their own indigenous Taoist and Confucian shamans,
and they came and set off fireworks and fired guns into the air to frighten off the evil spirits
that had caused the drought, but still no rain.
Finally, Bielholm told you, are the last resort interesting, the last resort.
Why is the last resort?
Because if they would reflect most fully on themselves, they would have to eat that jelly fish.
They called him the Rainmaker.
The Rainmaker was a wizened little old man who came from a neighbouring province.
When he arrived, they asked him what he needed.
He said, I just need a hut to go and sit in.
He went and sat in the hut for three days and three nights,
so after there was an unseasonable heavy fall of snow which melted to yield rain,
and the drought was relieved.
The Chinese picked to go back to business, but Bielholm, being not just a professor,
not just any old professor, but a German professor, wanted to know what had happened.
One of those wonderful missionaries who had never made any converse,
translated the I Ching in the version many of you will know as Well of the Doubt I Ching,
which is also a wonderful version in its talk of the man of calling, or the person of calling,
the person who beats the doubt.
And the Rainmaker said, I did nothing, I just sat in the hut.
Oh, come on, says Bielholm, you must have done something.
Was it magic spells, incantations?
No, no magic spells, no incantations.
Well, what was it, said Bielholm, getting persuaded.
I'll tell you what it was, said the Rainmaker, when I came here.
When I left my province, my spirit was in the doubt, in the drama,
in the way, the truth, in the life, in the Buddha nature, with a laugh.
But when I got here, I found my spirit was no longer in the doubt.
So I went and sat in the hut, and after three days and three nights,
my spirit came back into the doubt, and that's when the rain came.
Friends, I leave it with you, the indigenous people of this land,
and I watch for you here, like Ian McKinnon, like Mary Campbell, comes here.
They have set out a flower bed for you.
You have also brought your own plants, some of which harmonise very beautifully in.
You have brought gifts back from the diaspora.
The task before you now, after the fire, is to be in the doubt so that the rain comes,
and the drought is relieved, so that God is no longer alone.
You are no longer alone, but you are together in a position where, as a community,
you can discern decisions under the guidance of that spirit, which is holy,
and become conscious of the openings of the way that this beautiful place
might continue to serve for the world today and in the future.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
Can I have this set up in the box, which you are on this?
So, in a moment, if you are wanting to make a comment or ask a question,
there will be somebody bringing Mike Rounding back to you.
So, you might be as if you'd like to respond or ask a question please later on.
Chris, it's okay. There's one hardwired into the system up there, so I'm hearing things.
Chris, it's okay for you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Tis, thank you very much Alistair.
I found that very moving and very profound for us as a community.
My question to you really is, I heard you talk about grounding and becoming native to place.
Sorry, becoming indigenous to place, and I have my understanding of that,
but I'd really love to hear more about what you feel that really means for us.
Thank you for that question and just what we will, what we spent today discussing.
For the last 19 years I've lived in Governan, Glasgow,
to the Hartfest, a former shipbuilding area of Glasgow.
Sorry, just having published my sign there.
We were invited by people from that area and from Pollock,
who had been involved in 1990s motorway protests.
The M77 Pollock Free State campaign had the beautiful BBC documentary
called The Birdman of Pollock on YouTube about it.
When the motorway protest came to an end in the mid 1990s, Colin McLeod, the founder, said,
okay, we've shown them what we're against, now let's show them what we're for.
Let's take the defeat of the motorway being driven through Pollock Park,
but turn it into something beautiful.
He showed me a Scottish history book that used the term Gal Gale,
to speak of the people of the outer Hebrides, known as Finnish Gal,
or Galloway, or Galway in Ireland,
meaning the people who are strangers, strange or foreign gales.
These are the people where the Norse have come down
and mixed their blood with the garlic blood, so you had a hybrid people.
He said, well, that's how it is for so many people in Glasgow today.
None of us are pure this or that in terms of ethnic identity,
in terms of native identity.
There's a bit of this and a bit of that.
My mother's English, my father's Scottish,
my Scottish father has roots in the border
and roots some of them around here and so on.
We are all Gal Gales now.
That sense of coming to belong is what it's about.
It's expressed in our poetry, Robert Byrne,
a man to man for all that, for all that, and all that.
It's coming yet for all that, that man to man,
the world around, our brother's people, all that.
Amy Tenderson and the alternative Scottish national anthem,
the freedom to come all ye, black and white in,
we either marry it, black and white will marry each other.
It's in our proverbs, Alexander Carmichael cites one,
the bonds of blood are worth 30 fold,
the bonds of milk in other words nurture 100 fold,
because in the Celtic tradition there are two sacred duties,
hospitality for the short term
and postorship or adoption for the long term.
I have one of my poems in Love and Revolution
called Scotland, they showed a person belongs
in as much as he a willing, in as much as he a willing
to cherish and be cherished by this place and its people.
This is about the heart.
This is not about, I didn't call my best known book,
Love and Soil.
I called it Soil and Soul,
to which Satish Kumar said to me, we could add another one
and make it Soil, Soul and Society,
which is one of his recent books.
How do you do that in practice?
You first of all do it by welcoming in the stranger
on a basis of hospitality.
And then I would be quite blunt and say,
you show the stranger what it means to be a good guest,
because it doesn't work if the guests take over the guest house.
It doesn't work if the guests take over the guest house.
There needs to be a mutual respect
until the community can grow as a result of new ideas
and new blood coming in.
That becomes its strength, but also it holds cohesion.
What is its cohesion?
Its cohesion is ultimately the God-given dynamic
of what it means to be a community or place
in that particular bio-region.
How do you do that in practice and Gal Gael
if you come and visit us as a community meal every Thursday night?
We do it by sharing food, music, poetry, song, story.
We do it by having a workshop where people build boats
and they get out rowing boats and so on.
People like Madge come and visit us and educate us with songs.
That's how we do it.
Much as you do it here in this universal home,
that's why it's such a privilege.
Next person, just put your hand up
and the microphone will go to you.
Robbie Burns
talked about being in the world without a friend
was an expression that Robbie Burns used to describe that sense of alienation
in the world that was being created,
maybe partly because it was a very alienating cosmology
that was being brought into the world at that time.
I wondered whether you had any thoughts about the new cosmology
that might be emerging to bring it all together.
Obviously you've been talking about it.
I feel implicitly tonight,
but the word cosmology comes to my mind as a sort of framework to live by.
I wonder if you have any comments on that.
I'm just pulling up the point.
My hearing is being fixed,
and I'm missing about my phone settings.
This is Robbie Burns' poem of Youngstras Elan
after the Highland troops had been defeated at Caloddon.
It's not that far from here.
This is Dros Elan, the young chief's meditation.
Pick of snipes around my dwelling.
Howling tempers soar me row.
Turbid torrents, wintree's welling,
roving by my lonely cave.
Crystal streamlets gently flowing.
Busy hawns of baseman kind.
Western breezes softly blowing.
Suit not my destructive mind.
He's no longer able to connect with nature.
It suits not his destructive mind
because of the calamity that's come upon them.
In the cause of right engage.
Engaged.
Wrongs injurious to address.
Honest war was strongly waged,
but the heavens denied success.
Ruins wheel has written the words.
Not a hope that they've attained.
The wide world is all before us,
but a world without a friend.
So, in the Galgail Trust, many of our people
have multiple issues, homelessness,
addictions, mental health issues,
in and out of prison.
Multiple dynamics by which poverty
plays itself out.
And deepest of all in that is
profound loneliness.
I'm not sure if you can see
and deepest of all in that is
profound loneliness.
That book is called alone with the alone.
To be alone with the divine,
but when you are alone with the divine,
you are with cosmic presence.
If you haven't had an opportunity to connect with that,
if you've perhaps been subjected to spiritual abuse,
like cultic forms of religion,
or hardline, health-out-reven forms of religion,
you get cut off from that.
And so, in Writers and the Storm,
my most recent open climate change,
I end up talking about the Four Seas,
as clearance when people were disconnected
from their indiginality by being cleared from the land,
and today kept off the land,
unless you've got money, it's very hard
to be able to afford to live in rural areas.
Clearance collapse,
the psychological collapse
that brings about, the spiritual collapse,
like you've just heard in that poem,
that even the beauties of nature
no longer suit whose distracted mind,
the wide world is all before me,
the world of empires is all before me,
but a world without a friend.
And the third seed, consumption,
when we can't get no satisfaction
in the world,
because we're cut off from our ability
to find authentic satisfaction,
we look for satisfaction,
not by true satisfies,
but by false satisfies,
and that drives consumerism,
which drives climate change,
and then the Four Seas,
the antidote to it, community.
I consider the single most important work
that any of us can do in the face of climate change,
in the face of poverty,
in the face of war and other such related matters,
is to hold for Takapama,
the American Quake,
it calls spaces for spitable to the soul.
It's not my business to tell you
what you should be doing at Fenton,
but if it was,
if I was one of you,
my difference was
what I've been discerning over these last few days
as I've prepared for this talk
would be to suggest that the most fundamental thing here
is that you hold spaces
that are hospitable to the soul,
where pilgrims can come from afar,
who need physical presence,
who need a place to stay and rest,
affordably,
who need the hospitality,
at least for the short term,
if not the hostorship for the long term,
who need the music, song, story,
the love that you can offer here.
I walk through this space,
I see a lot of love manifested in it,
the way your houses are,
the way people interact,
the way the gardens are and so on.
When I was in Papua New Guinea,
where I learned so much
of these things of a young man,
I was there for four years,
Sir Bernard Naracobi,
who was then the Minister for Justice,
and with a trustee of the organisation
I worked for,
the South Pacific Appropriate Technology Foundation,
had a poem that I often used,
I used it for the group today.
And the black-skinned area of the Pacific
is called Melanesia,
I was just thinking from Micronesia,
so we'll talk about Melanesian people.
Welcome to the University of Melanesia,
the ancient, timeless, eternal
University of Melanesia,
the village where courses are offered in living.
Welcome to the University of Scotland,
the ancient, timeless, eternal University of Scotland,
the village where courses are offered in living.
You know, if you fork in the future,
if you look towards the future,
if you can simply create simple structures,
I would say she has radical simplicity,
radical simplicity,
by which and through which,
in ways formal and informal,
you can offer courses in living.
Then that new age,
then that new age turns another leaf
and finds another breath of life.
Thank you for that question.
How's our time, Rebecca?
Another 15, excellent.
So, there's a hand up at the back there.
Thank you for...
Chris, when you were a student,
I never knew you could be as useful as this.
Thank you very much.
I mean, I wish we could turn back...
I wish we could turn back the clock and...
Please, my friend, yes.
Hang on, wait a minute.
I'd like to just turn you back on here.
Wrong one.
I'll speak to these.
I'm wondering if you could speak to
processes that support
looking at the shadow in community.
So, processes, yes.
Just your thoughts.
Thank you.
Well...
I need to fiddle with my back
in this other way.
I defend myself as my own voice coming
with a slight delay.
Did you notice how I'm telling you about
the third part of that dream?
Let me unpack it a bit more
of what happened in that dream,
because I was shorting it each time.
So, I went down to the pier
and recently I've been taking young families
out canoe fishing
in what I call my dugouts,
or wherever in my dugouts.
We've got two inflatable canoes.
Wonderful things.
I've been taking them out fishing
in the Firth of Clyde
and in the Firth of Forth of Kinghorn,
while the mackerel have been in.
Substantially, to help them ground in place.
The other day, family, she's German,
she's Chilean,
hoping them to ground in place.
So, fish has been on my mind a lot, just now.
It's not surprising that fish came so strongly in the dream.
But what happened in the third part?
After me-planting Ian's flowerbed,
I wandered down to the pier,
and I'm thinking, because the mackerel are in,
I'll probably catch them off the pier.
I've got my hand lying with me
and I go down
and I take the lead weight with the two mackerel feathers on it.
I only use two when I'm in the canoe,
so I don't puncture it too often.
It's not too great when you're out half a mile off shore
and you've got an inflatable canoe.
I have to bring out a little hand pump, of course.
The other day it happened,
I've got a puncture, so it would be kind of
pump-worn, catch-worn, pump-worn, catch-worn,
and that way we kept it satisfactory.
So I threw out the hand line on the pier.
And I felt a heavy weight on the end,
and I pulled it in, and I thought,
this feels like an unusual fish.
And up came this very beautiful,
but frightening fish.
And it was a long fish,
and it was covered in colourful
spines like a sea urchin.
Now, remember your question,
which is about process,
for dealing with the shadow.
It was covered in colourful spines like a sea urchin.
I half knew its name,
of course, because it's of another manifestation of
your spacefully the jellyfish,
which comes to me in different forms
and dreams at different times.
So, on this occasion, it's colourful, but scary fish,
and it will foul hook it through the back.
So I thought, I'm going to take the hook out
and I'm going to throw it back into the sea.
It's probably edible, but something in me
felt icky about...
I mean, that's always a sign about your stuff.
And it's about interaction of shadows.
So I did this, but while I was
sewing this fish back,
another stranger came,
and he had a rather rakish appearance,
rather casual appearance,
and without asking, he took my fishing line
and he threw it in
and pulled in these fish,
which are these two big black
saith of cold fish
that I mentioned.
And then I woke up
and I realised that
all three of those fish
had been manifestations of the shadow.
The first one was all prickly.
It was beautiful, but it was prickly.
If you're going to have the beauty,
you have to accept that the prickliness
is going to come with it.
And the second one,
I knew we had to eat it.
I showed the man who had taken my line,
I showed him how to kill it,
how to kill both of them,
because we were going to take them back
and we were going to eat them.
Now, why have I told you about that dream?
Because where are you?
Yes, thank you.
Why have I told you about that dream?
Part of the reason why
am I moving out to the site of the zoom here?
is to model being able to talk about our shadows
and how we interact with the shadows.
So how do you do it?
You talk about your jellyfishies
or whatever it is.
And so you set what in Quakerism
we call patterns and examples
of ways of doing things.
A pattern,
a way of doing things.
An example, a case study,
like I've just given to you.
You create a climate
in which it can be comfortable
to talk about these things.
Now, one of the things that that achieves,
if it is well held,
if the space is well held,
and by well held,
I mean being held in that place
of prayer or contemplation,
being held in that God space.
If it is well held,
if the facilitator
or others in the group
keeps calling people back
to the God given intention
that they are there for,
then you will be able to do it
in a way that processes it.
Colin McLeod, the co-founder
of the Gal Gale, used to put it,
shit happens,
what matters is how you shovel it.
And in my view, with land reform,
the single most important thing
that communities need to learn
is how to shovel shit.
Because when you shovel shit,
as you well know, you may compost.
But if you don't shovel the shit,
the shit just stinks,
causes illness.
So I would suggest these are the kind of ways
you talk about it.
But what is so often missing,
including in right-on communities,
including in Christian groups and so on,
what is so often missing
is holding it in that divine fire,
and calling it back to that God's peace,
as I call it.
I think this is why a lot of process-related stuff
goes wrong.
Because people are trying to do it
at the level of the head and the heart and the hand.
But they're forgetting,
they're forgetting the device,
that the chief steward
on the log C-force had,
by which he communicated to the captain.
I know that's a hierarchical model of the divine,
and you all know it doesn't work like that.
The divine emerges from within.
But we're talking about how dreams use symbolism.
So that will be probably as much as I could suggest
to you just now.
Keep holding it in the fire.
If you don't hold it in the fire of God,
the fire of people's shadow
will burn those around them.
If you hold it in the fire of God,
you will help others together, collectively,
to process, to recognise the shadow,
and to process it.
Conflict is normal in healthy communities,
but it must be recognised and processed.
Judith, he was very good at doing that.
Judith is really impressive
from what I've seen of her work.
It was a joy being his mind.
No, I just wanted to share.
I have such a powerful memory
of Dorothy and Irene,
sitting in a Monday evening,
sharing with us the shadow of their legacies.
Irene said it was the self-sacrifice
that went as far as martyrdom,
and Dorothy said it was not standing up
for herself with Peter.
Peter wasn't in the community at the time,
Fe wnaethau iawn iawn ar ddweudwyr ar y Por , a'i sanol.
Ishawn i'r wneud o bod yn gorfod!
iawn iechyd System Am i'r mhau
I samurai bwyd, yn gwybod frydynau'r dde due'r y gallwn gwybodog nawr,
yw iddiodol i Gymraeg Unwydol'u gw translation....
Beth fydddiw'r bwyd.
Rydyn ni'n iawn at fwyair maen nhw ein bod derbyn nesaf wath ar si intriguing he...?
No boeddam i yn d resolutionydd yn amdano hynny,
felly mae armrangled o newid ychydig symud yma,
ac rydyn ni'n ystod y gymyddiannau George McLeod
FO'r amgu DRYF wer thwrn nhw yng ng poniad ymlaen ymlaen?
Wel drwy deall termau ar gyfer heatedr oha cycl, fiwr yn CRT y pwysiadau yn yr un,
rin containersiaethor ac yn dda ac sydd wedi'i cymaint byddig oohl yng Ngynhyrch cymaint him wneud
y fawr amgarau yma, yn y firstair honol, fe'r 20 mae mater gerai gyrdd yn einlab wedi'i
ffer Dru, teimlo pob dull yn y proses iechydgodion oherwydd yr argylched soru mylliant
yn ni, a am eu bakel yn ni!
So on, so on, I own. And she feeds the fairies. So it entered into a thought discussion.
You'll find it all cataloged in my book, Po spaghetti.
Which expose all of this. A difficult discussion about what you feed the fairies on.
And no it's not bread and butter. You feed the fairies on venison and honey.
So you know with you. We've um during weeks have run here we've had an outing to Cordu and to the farie hill there.
Rydym yn ddole mawr, ogen y Strydedch Popo'ch glChoan Mackinnensol,
nl o fy nhw, mae eto definit i deter i eu cy unterwegs shapedodaeth,
i'r wneud a'r am clocksrw.
?<p begining oldeithas
dw i'n ddylch chi'n cyn o'n swyddo,
chi'r dyfodol Metrach o d fourteen.
Yn hyn, dylai fod yn gofio o South Mlyuso,
roeddwn am Bo CHAN,
mae nhw'n yn fawr a hynny'n dyluniau hefyd,
..mitgwyd maen nhin diddig y ffer abdomen.
Bydd yn ffordd ddifbuat o'r meddwl ynkin.
Mae'r eich symlod hynny yn ym burido a ni fod yn yr uddi.
H lywan dros y dibwysig a'i hefyd yn ddiddordeb yn phed .
Im serwydd ei weld yn borrow ac yn cafodd dddysio,
efallai chi'n gynnul i adrithiau.
I've lost my track as to why I got there.
Yeah, yeah, basically.
But basically I caught one of the elders in the group before I left and said,
you know, could you just check in with that person?
Because I think that had I had more time, she would have wanted to have it out
with me and there's not been that opportunity.
So could you just could you let her know that I picked up the vibe from her?
It was not the place for me to justify the kind of person I am.
Oh, yeah, I know where I was getting to.
But the other thing is the other thing
to this is that I get people say to me and you will well understand why if you're
a vegetarian or vegan, which many of you probably are, say,
Alistair, how can you still eat meat?
How can you still go fishing?
To which my answer is folks, I just do.
And if I try to suppress that in myself, it's it's not going to work.
But notice how I acknowledge it.
I acknowledge that aspect of what some of you might see and which that young
woman today probably saw as being my shadow.
We can one of the ways we can help open this ground
is by acknowledging aspects of ourselves that we know others might have difficulty.
Then feel a sense of relief being slight.
Any more one up there?
Oh, somebody's got the bike already.
Yeah, hang on.
Wait, let's switch.
Oh, yeah.
Alistair, we've just got two minutes.
Is it two minutes?
Yep, I think we should don't have time to.
Well, it takes us to the last one and.
OK, that's come out of Alistair.
Annwyr a hamelag ancien a hamelaigio.
I don't speak the garlic.
I know enough to understand your greeting that part of my own shadow is that in
spite of being raised in.
Norslox and Lewis, not only don't I speak the garlic, but I have the greatest
difficulty in remembering even basic phrases.
And I think that's a psychological issue in me.
And I've spoken to other people of my generation, some of whom have the same
problem too, and mostly we don't talk about it because it is embarrassing.
But you know what?
Whenever you hit on something that is embarrassing,
it's only the ego that's being offended.
It's nothing that the fire of hell can't burn off because the fire of love is
that which only burns off, which isn't authentic.
So I have to acknowledge to you in front of everybody here that I do not
actually understand the garlic you have just spoken to me beyond your initial
good evening greeting.
And me neither.
Alistair.
But I know that I don't understand it, but I do speak it a little.
So when I am weak, I am strong.
No.
When I am weak, then I am strong.
But there we go.
Spence, spence of weakness.
So the rain maker had no extraordinary power.
And yet somehow he constantly did the rain around him.
Adrian Rich, the American poet,
with Jewish and Scottish Presbyterian roots.
My heart is moved by all I cannot change.
So much has been destroyed.
I have to cast my lot with those who age after age,
purposely with no extra ordinary power we constitute today.
Your future will be built up from no extra ordinary power.
And I'd like to just close, if I may,
by reading a part of the poem from R.S. Thomas.
I should say that to use my embarrassment with language.
I've got the phonetic spelling printed out here.
Because it's pronounced double L, E, Y, N.
How the heck keeps it on set?
Even though my grandmother was of Welsh
rooting, the poem is called The Moon in Slain.
And if there's any Welsh people here,
please don't shout out the correct pronunciation,
because my hearing aids are not tuned to you just now.
The Moon in Slain.
The last part of the Moon of Jesus gives way to the dark.
The serpent digests the egg.
Here on my knees in this stone church,
that is full only of the silent congregation of shepherds.
The silent congregation of shadows and the sea sound.
It is easy to believe Yates was right.
Just as old choirs had not sung, shells have swallowed them.
The pied laps of the Bible, the bell
fetches no people to the brittle miracle of the bread.
The sand is waiting for the running back of the grains in the wall into its blonde glass.
Religion is over.
And what will emerge from the body of the new moon?
No one can say.
Religion is over.
And what will emerge from the body of the new moon?
No one can say.
But a voice sounds in my ear.
Why so fast mortal?
These very seas are baptized.
The parish of a saints name, time can not unfrock.
In cities that have outgrown their promise,
people are becoming pilgrims again, if not to this place,
then to the recreation of it in their own spirits.
In cities that have outgrown their promise,
people are becoming pilgrims again, if not to this place,
then to the recreation of it in their own spirits.
mae fyrd iawn hyn wedi'i ddaled
mae fyrd yma
mewn siw lwn yn dwiol gyda rhaglen
unrhyw gorffae
eu schweithgell
Y Llywodraeth Y Llywodraeth Cymru